                 Hudson River (HUD) NERR Water Quality Metadata Form
                       (May - Dec. 1995)
                  Latest Update: June 13, 2000
                                
               I. Data Set & Research Descriptors
                                
1.   Principal Investigator: William C. Nieder, Research
     Coordinator

     Contact Person: William C. (Chuck) Nieder
                     c/o Bard College Field Station
                     Annanadale-on-Hudson, NY  12504
                     (914) 758-5193 ph  758-5192 Fax
                     email: cnieder@ocean.nos.noaa.gov

2.   Entry Verification:

     Data are analyzed for outliers and anomalies using the outlier macro for 
Excel 5.0 developed by the CDMO.  These macros discover outlier values which 
fall outside the range that the instrument is designed to measure (see section 
II.8 of this document). Questionable data (using the CDMO ver3.0 Appendix B YSI 
Data Review and Editing Protocol) are either deleted or identified in section 
II.11.  All missing data and deleted data will be identified in section II.12.   
Person responsible for data verification: Research Coordinator.

3.   Research Objectives:

     Measurements are taken every 30 minutes over a two to four week period from 
April 1 through the end of November of each year at two locations within the 
Tivoli Bays component of the Hudson River NERR.  One datalogger monitors 
tributary water (Saw Kill, SK) entering the bay and the other monitors the 
Hudson River water flooding and ebbing to and from the bay (TS).  The objective 
of this study is to monitor the quality of the surface water entering (via 
stream flow and tidal exchange) and leaving (via tidal exchange) Tivoli South 
Bay.  This will help us understand the relative importance on each source of 
water on Tivoli South Bay.

4.   Research Methods:  

     Two YSI6000 dataloggers have been placed at the Tivoli Bays component site 
of the Reserve.  The instruments are deployed 0.5 meters off the bottom in 
vertically mounted perforated PVC tubes.  Instruments are deployed for a three 
to four week duration from April through November each year.  After instruments 
are retrieved, instrument calibration is checked against standards, data are 
uploaded, and instrument probes are serviced.

5.   Site Location and Character:

     The Hudson River National Estuarine Research Reserve (HUDNERR) is a 
multicomponent site composed of approximately 5,000 acres of tidal wetland, open 
water, and adjacent upland buffer habitat.  The four component sites of the 
Reserve are located on the Hudson River in New York State by river miles (RM) 
proceeding north from the southern tip of Manhattan.  These include: Stockport 
Flats (RM 124)(42o02'30"N 73o46'00"W), Columbia County; Tivoli Bays (RM 
98)(42o02'15"N 73o55'10"W), Dutchess County; and Iona Island (RM 45)(41o18'15"N 
73o58'45"W) and Piermont Marsh (RM 24)(41o02'30"N 73o54'15"W), Rockland County.  
These four components are located along 100 river miles of the Hudson and are 
representative of the diverse plant and animal communities that occupy the 
salinity gradient within the Hudson estuary.  Development within the watersheds 
of Hudson River NERR component sites ranges from predominantly urban/suburban to 
forested/agricultural.
     The two YSI6000 dataloggers are placed at Tivoli Bays component site. The 
Saw Kill (SK) 42? 01’ 01.543”N, 73? 54’ 53.589”W drains a 26.6 square mile 
(6886.5 hectares) watershed that is characterized as a highly mixed land use 
watershed.  The dominant land uses within this watershed include: forested 
(51.1%), agriculture (25.8%), and urban (16.5%).  Tivoli South Bay (TS) 42? 01’ 
37.336”W, 73? 55’ 33.445”W, the receiving body for the Saw Kill, is a tidal 
freshwater wetland with a tidal range of 3.9 ft. (1.19 m).  The Reserve staff 
have identified urban and residential land use practices as having a major 
influence on the water chemistry of the Saw Kill.  Since residential coverage 
continues to increase, we hope that the intensive monitoring of the surface 
waters in this watershed will identify trends caused by this rapid development.  

6.   Data collection period:

     YSI6000 datalogger sampling at the Saw Kill (SK) and Tivoli South Bay (TS) 
began during May 1995.  All sampling is ongoing, however, we cannot sample from 
approximately December 1 through March 31 due to winter storms and ice on the 
Hudson River and tributaries.

7.   Associated researchers and projects:

     Hudson River NERR Water Quality Monitoring: 
Physical and chemical constituents of the tributary waters discharging into 
HUDNERR marshes and marsh waters during ebb tides are measured monthly and 
during storm events.  Concentrations of nitrate, phosphate, sulphate, dissolved 
oxygen (DO), and chloride are measured, as well as, seston, alkalinity, pH, 
temperature, salinity, and conductivity. 
     Saw Kill Water Quality Monitoring:  
The surface water draining from five subcatchments representing five dominant 
land use practices within the Saw Kill have been monitored during several storm 
events.  These five land use practices include: row crop agriculture, orchard, 
residential, solid waste landfill, and forested.  All of the above constituents 
have been monitored during this project.
     Associated researchers with the work at Tivoli Bays include: scientists 
from the Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Millbrook, NY; Yale School of Forestry 
and Environmental Studies, New Haven, CT; and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 
Troy, NY.


                II. Physical Structure Descriptors


8. Variable sequence, range of measurements, units, resolution, and accuracy:

Variable Name   Range of Measurements (Units)     Resolution          Accuracy
DATE            1-12, 1-31, 00-99 (mo,day,yr)     1mo, 1da, 1yr         NA
HOUR            0-24, 0-60,0-60(hr,min,sec)       1hr, 1min, 1sec       NA 
WTEMP           -5 to 45oC                        0.01 C             +/- 0.15C  
SPCOND          0 to 100 mS/cm                    0.01mS/cm          +/- 0.5% of 
reading+
                                                                        
0.001mS/cm
SALINITY        0-70 parts per thousand(ppt)      0.01ppt            +/- 1.0% of 
reading
                                                           or 0.1ppt (whichever 
is greater)    DOSAT           0-200% air saturation(air sat.)   0.1%@ air sat.     
+/- 2% @ air sat.
DOSAT           200-500% air saturation(air sat.) 0.1%@ air sat.     +/- 6% @ 
air sat.
DOMG            0-20 mg/l                         0.01 mg/l          +/- 0.2 
mg/l
DOMG            20-50 mg/l                        0.01 mg/l          +/- 0.6 
mg/l
SHALLOW DEPTH   0 to 9.1 m                        0.001 m            +/- 0.018 m
pH              2 to 14                           0.01 units         +/- 0.2 
units

Columns are separated by tabs.


9.  Coded variable indicator and variable code definitions

     Site definitions: SK = Saw Kill, TS = Tivoli South Bay


10.  Data anomalies

May, 1995: None to report

June, 1995: 

TS:  During low tide on 06/17/95-06/20/95 the depth probe
          recorded negative values.  Since the SpCond did not
          read 0.0 mS/cm the probes were not exposed to air (these include:
          06/17/95 11:30:00 & 12:00:00; 06/18/95 12:00:00,
          12:30:00, and 13:00:00; 06/19/95 12:30:00 through
          14:00:00; and 06/20/95 01:30:00 through 02:30:00 and
          13:00:00 through 15:00:00).


July, 1995: 

TS:    During low tide on 07/09/95-07/10/95 the depth probe
          recorded negative values.  Since the SpCond did not
          read 0.0 mS/cm the probes were not exposed to air (these include:
          07/09/95 16:30:00 through 17:30:00; and 07/10/95
          17:30:00 through 18:30:00).


August, 1995: 

SK:   pH values collected by the SK datalogger from
          8/30/95 20:30:00 to the end of the month dropped
          dramatically and were deleted.  Since this pH
          probe failed during September, 1995 all of the pH
          values collected at SK are questionable.


September, 1995:    

SK:  All pH values were too low and were deleted.  


October, 1995: None to report


November, 1995:     

TS:  The data for D.O and % oxygen saturation on
          11/14/95 at 12:00:00 are questionable. 
          These data are much lower than the data collected the 
          interval before and after.



11.  Missing Data 

No turbidity probes were available during this year, therefore no turbidity was 
collected.

May, 1995

          The YSI6000 data loggers were not deployed until May 19
     so the following data are missing:

     TS:  No data from 5/1/95 0:00:00 through 5/19/95 13:00:00.

     SK:  No data from 5/1/95 00:00:00 through 5/19/95 12:30:00.


June, 1995
     
     TS:  No data from 6/15/95 12:30:00 through 6/16/95 13:30:00
          for servicing.

          No pH data from 6/16/95 14:00:00 though end of June due
          to faulty probe.

     SK:  No data from 06/15/95 13:00:00 through 06/16/95
          13:30:00 for servicing.


July, 1995

     TS:  No pH data from 07/1/95 00:00:00 through 07/11/95
          07:00:00 due to faulty probe.

          No data from 07/11/95 07:30:00 through 07/14/95
          12:30:00 for servicing.

         
     SK:  No data from 7/11/95 08:00:00 through 7/14/95 12:30:00
          for servicing.


August, 1995

     TS:  No data from 8/7/95 13:00:00 through 8/9/95 15:00:00
          and 8/29/95 07:00:00 through 8/30/95 08:00:00 for
          servicing. Instrument failed to log data on 8/25 0730 through 8/25 
0900.

     SK:  No data from 8/7/95 13:30:00 through 8/9/95 15:00:00
          and 8/29/95 07:30:00 through 8/30/95 08:00:00 for
          servicing. No pH data from 08/30/95 20:30:00 through
          08/31/95 23:30:00 due to faulty probe.


September, 1995

     TS:  No data from 9/28/95 9:30:00 through 9/30/95 23:30:00
          for servicing.  


     SK:  No data from 9/28/95 9:30:00 through 9/30/95 23:30:00
          for servicing. pH values for SK are missing for the
          entire month because the values were too low(see section
          11).


October, 1995

     TS:  No data collected from 10/1/95 0:00:00 through 10/2/95
          10:00:00 and 10/24/95 9:00:00 through 10/25/95 7:30:00
          for servicing.

     SK:  No data collected from 10/1/95 0:00:00 through 10/2/95
          10:00:00 and 10/24/95 9:00:00 through 10/25/95 7:30:00
          for servicing.


November, 1995

     TS:  No data from 11/25/95 9:00:00 through 11/30/95
          23:30:00.  YSI6000 datalogger was pulled for the year
          (winter months).  We expect to deploy them by April 1,
          1996.

     SK:  No data from 11/24/95 08:30:00 through 11/30/95
          23:30:00. YSI6000 datalogger was pulled for the year
          (winter months).  We expect to deploy them by April 1,
          1996. 


December, 1995

     TS:  No data due to ice.
     SK:  No data due to ice.
